# Notes for 2020-04-07

Reviving project.

Changes

- Updating version of Empirical
  - <https://github.com/amlalejini/Empirical/tree/76177d23f61fcb4bd346b8bd113b8ab337b93c77>
  - `Binomial.h` => `Distribution.h`
    - Todo: make sure everything still behaves as expected
- C++ 14 => C++ 17 (for new Empirical features)
- Using newer version of GCC
  - locally, 9.2.0

Fixing warnings

## Questions for Lauren/Emily

- Experimental design, top to bottom
  - Fitness models: gradient, NK
  - STEP 1
    - Gradient model - full combinations
      - changing every 5 generations vs. 1 generation
        - range of values that give comparable effective change rate: scale by 1/2^K
    - NK model - full combinations
  - STEP 2
    - Starting genome size(s): 128, 64, 32, 16
    - Pick some anchor points,
    - Vary mutation rate, static environment
    - Vary mutation rate, intermediately changing environment
    - Static mutation rate, vary environmental change rate
  - EVOLVABILITY
    - Run for G generations, RANDOMIZE ENVIRONMENT (fix architecture) (as static environment)
- What gene size & number of genes were we using?
- Change rate => shift to fitness model specific choices
  - e.g., based on number of bits required to represent the environment, verify calc
- Features to add?
  - Evolvability experiments?
- Controls
  - Random drift

## Research Questions

- What is the effect of changing environment and mutation rate on genetic architectures?
  - Control: what do we expect by chance? Run X replicates w/random drift
  - **"We show that the evolution of modularity can be explained by an interaction between the rate of environmental change and the mutation rate"**
- Are architectures evolved in a changing environment more evolvable?
  - Lock in evolved architectures, randomize/change the environment, compare fitness
- What are the 'effective mutation rates' that different conditions approach?
  - By varying number of coding sites, genotypes can achieve different effective mutation rates
  - Expected number of changes to coding sites => multiply mutation rate by number of coding sites

## Experiments to run

- Sweep (bitflip) mutation rate [with what change rate?]
  - VALS_TO_TRY=( .00003 .0001 .0003 .001 .003 .01 .03 .1 )
- Sweep change rate [with what mutation rate?]
  - NK: CHANGE_TO_TRY=(0 1 2 5 10 20 50 100 200 500 1000 5000 )
  - Gradient: ?
-

## Previous runs

- CHANGE_TO_TRY=(0 1 2 5 10 20 50 100 200 500 1000 5000)
- VALS_TO_TRY=( 0 .00001 .0001 .001 .003 .01 .03 .1 )

## Notes

- How many distinct environmental states are possible?
  - Gradient
    - Bits to describe environment = NUM_GENES * GENE_SIZE
    - Number of distinct environment states = 2^(environment bits)
  - NK
    - Bits to describe the environment = NUM_GENES * ( 2^(GENE_SIZE) )
    - Number of distinct environment states = 2^(environment bits)

## Features to add

- Mutation tracking
- Interactive web interface
- Phylogeny tracking
- [x] Load environment from file
- [x] Environment tracking (environment state at snapshot/summary output intervals)
- [x] Phase 2: secondary evolution phase that allows for new mutation rates, change rates, initial commands/modes
  - e.g., randomize_env to start, flip environment
- [x] Change frequency